Poor recruitment paper draft
================

# Physical drivers of poor recruitment in the South Atlantic

Ana Vaz, Kyle Shertzer, Kevin Craig, Ruoying He, Taylor Shropshire

<div>

> **None**
>
> <div>
>
> Authors not in any particular order, need to add other contributors
>
> </div>

</div>

Two different questions:

- Large scale variability/trends match with the recruitment patterns.

  - find environmental parameters that matches patterns but not
    necessary to understand the dynamics driving the changes

- Look at seasonal variability and check if there is any trend at this
  scale.

Specific Hypothesis:

1\) Stratification due to higher temperatures

- Ana question: Surface and Bottom out of phase as per recent analyses.

- How to look at it without the 3D temperature field??

2\) Gulf Stream deflection changes.

- The Gulf Stream frontal system and eddies from meandering at the
  Charleston Bump are suggested as main drivers of both primary
  production and recruitment (gag).

<!-- -->

- When the GS has a strong deflection (which happens in March/April) it
  facilitates the origin of the so-called “Charleston Gyre” (actually
  long lived large mesoscale eddies), which brings warm waters (and
  larvae) to the shelf, while increasing productivity with upwelling at
  the center.

- Support so far:

  - Significant correlation of SSH with recruitment (RS and other
    species are out of phase, which matches the rec-devs)

  - Higher inter annual energy BT, SSH, SST (not GS area) last 10 years

# Introduction

*What is new?*

*What?* (topic)

*Why?* (motivation)

*How?* (methods)

A number of fish species from the snapper-grouper complex have shown a
decline pattern of recruitment in recent stock assessments. While this
trend is clear for the winter spawning species, it is not shared by
species with summer spawning peak, indicating that environmental drivers
could underline these patterns. Here we look at trends of environmental
variables using a high resolution 30 year forecast hydrodynamic model,
exploring potential environmental linkages leading to poor recruitment.

- Intro to recruitment processes.

- How environment can affect recruitment.

- Review our species life traits of those showing decline or not, and
  discuss indication of environmental influence

- Look at the study region environment, major physical drivers, and
  known variability.

- Discuss unknowns of physical environment. Spatio-temporal scales,
  seasonality, etc.

Predictability of the system can be understood as the system being
constant, or it can be that changes of the system are constant.

# Methods

Here we used 30 years of environmental fields from a novel high
resolution hydrodynamic product of our study region, the CNAPS 2.0 (He
et al., in review).

## Hydrodynamic model

- describe CNAPS

- Here our focus is on model variables that are essential ecosystem
  indicators, particularly related to the stratification structure.
  These include sea-surface temperature (SST), bottom temperature, and
  mixed layer depth. These variables are given at daily resolution for
  the study area. In order to optimize our analyses,only values over the
  continental shelf (0-700m) were considered.

## Recruitment Deviations

## Climatological Indexes

## Analyses

### Trends

We explored spatio-temporal trends of environmental parameters for our
study region, considering different spatio-temporal configurations
(trends within seasons, for areas with species distribution, etc).

### Empirical Orthogonal Functions (EOFs)

We applied EOFs to characterize the spatial and temporal timescales of
variability of environmental variables. Analyzes considered variables
given at daily, monthly and seasonal frequencies. For monthly and
seasonal analyses, the three-dimensional fields (lat, lon, time) of
daily values were averaged at monthly and seasonal frequencies,
respectively.

Analyzed if the temporal variability of the series are related with the
Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO), the North Atlantic Oscillation
(NAO), or other indexes associated with high and low frequency
variability in the South Atlantic (by means of correlation of PCAs with
relevant indexes).

Exploration of possible patterns by considering seasonal-reliant EOFs or
other methods that can consider interannual variability of individual
seasons (by correlation of PCAs of individual seasons with recruitment
series).

Comparison of principal spatial EOF modes with spatial distribution of
the species presenting recruitment changes (negative and positive).

### Change break analyses

### Characterization of seasonality

We applied different analyses to characterize the predictability of our
system and how they changed over time (Colwell 1974; Barneche et al.
2018). These analyses were extended not only to understand
predictability over longer time scales, but also considering variability
within seasons.

One method to explore environmental predictability is to extract the
seasonality and colour of environmental noise. Seasonality represents
the regularity in the timing and magnitude of fluctuations in the
average environmental state over seasons. Here we consider bounded
seasonality following Barneche et al. (2018), which is defined as the
fraction of the total variance of the series that can be explained by
predictable seasonal periodicity.

Colour of environmental noise is the temporal autocorrelation of an
environmental variable. Thus, it reflects how predictable the
environment is between successive time points, and how far into the
future the environmental state is likely to be similar. Colour values of
0 indicate white noise, or that measurements of a variable are not
autocorrelated, colour values over 0 is redded noise, indicating
autocorrelation of the series.

- need to explain Colwell patterns

Constancy (C): measures the extent to which the environment is the same
for all months in all years

Contingency (M): measures the extent to which the environmental
differences between months are the same in all years

Predictability (P): is the sum of Constancy (C) and Contingency (M)

### Spectral analyses of energy density at different time-periods

Define frequency band cutoffs based on Muñiz et al., 2021 (1)
Interannual frequencies 384–1152 days (\>1-3 years) (2) Annual
frequencies 101–383 days (3) Intra-seasonal frequencies 20–100 days (4)
Synoptic frequencies 16–19 days Normalize the band energy by the total
spectral density to find the relative contributions \# Unbounded
Seasonal

**Bibliography**

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent">

<div id="ref-barneche2018" class="csl-entry">

Barneche, Diego R., D. Ross Robertson, Craig R. White, and Dustin J.
Marshall. 2018. “Fish Reproductive-Energy Output Increases
Disproportionately with Body Size.” *Science* 360 (6389): 642–45.
<https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aao6868>.

</div>

<div id="ref-colwell1974" class="csl-entry">

Colwell, Robert K. 1974. “Predictability, Constancy, and Contingency of
Periodic Phenomena.” *Ecology* 55 (5): 1148–53.
<https://doi.org/10.2307/1940366>.

</div>

</div>
